All right, good morning everybody. I'm
Richard. Welcome to statistical
rethinking for 2026. I've split the
course into two sections this year,
which I hope will be a useful
innovation. Um,
this is the general course outline.
You're uh here on Tuesday, so you're in
the beginner section. This should not
discourage you from also attending
Thursday if you like. It'll just be
confusing. Yeah. [laughter]
Buth maybe you'll you'll enjoy doing
both. Uh the way this is going to work
is on Tuesdays I'm doing the beginner
section and on Thursdays I'm doing the
experience section. The experience
section starts where the beginner
section ends at the end of the 10 weeks.
All right. So you can lead a double life
if you take both and I know some people
will. Uh but the intention is if you're
truly a beginner to basian stats and to
scientific statistical modeling you
start with the beginner section um we're
going to go through it on a slow pace
over 10 weeks and do the first half of
the textbook and the uh experience
section if you want to take this again
next year. Um we'll pick up exactly
where the beginning section ends and do
the second half of the book. Uh also
since the lectures will be recorded, you
can do the experience section in your
free time at starting at the end of
March uh if you so choose. Um or come
ask me questions. Uh the first thing you
should do procedurally is make sure you
write down the URL of this website.
They're at the top, the GitHub site that
I'm going to maintain the course
materials on. Uh there's a registration
link there too, which is just to get
your email so that I can get you on the
mailing list and send you links to the
book and things like that. Yeah. Um but
it's not really essential. If you just
want to physically come to class and be
here and and hang out, that's fine as
well. I'll assign one homework problem
each week, and I'll put that up for you
folks later this week, depending upon
how far I get in the lecture today. I
will design the homework. So there's
there's some uncertainty for all of us
uh uh in that. Um are there any
questions about the course structure
right now? Uh if not then uh we'll get
going. U what is the point of this
course? It's it's called statistical
rethinking and it is a basian course and
so sometimes people think oh what's
rethinking here is we're doing bays
instead of frequentism and that's true
but that's not really what I mean when I
say statistical rethinking. I mean
statistical rethinking is putting
science before statistics. Very often
when statistics is taught, it's a bunch
of procedures for getting your paper
published, right? And the connection to
some scientific theory uh described
anyway is often incredibly vague and
handwavy. And in this course, we don't
work that way. We start with scientific
models and we build up to statistical
procedures that you can have confidence
in. Uh so here's the the kind of
political stump speeched version of
that. uh for any kind of statistical
analysis to produce scientific insight
it really depends upon scientific models
as a statistical procedure by itself has
no meaning.
It gets its meaning from external
theories formal or informal but some
kind of theory is always used to
interpret the output of statistical
procedure. Um, and what researchers
really need to be supported in in uh,
statistical education in the sciences, I
believe, is to be taught a workflow for
doing that connection, not leaving it up
to heristics or some sort of guesswork
or a bunch of social anxieties that you
get by reading published papers, but to
actually have some scientific logical
workflow that will connect a scientific
theory to a statistical procedure so
that you can justify it and feel
confident in the interpretations of the
output. it. So that's what I want to
teach in this course. Uh it's going to
take a long time because we're going to
go at a pace that that hopefully is
learnable. Uh but what we're going to
keep coming back to again and again in
the different examples in the course is
this thing that I call the core basian
workflow. Uh
this could be elaborated and will be
elaborated a lot in different examples,
but this core is something that's
understandable that we're going to start
to build and justify. Um uh in this core
basian workflow we uh we transparently
say what the scientific models we're
using are. We transparently say what our
questions about them are and we use
those to derive statistical procedures.
Um and then we produce estimates that
are also uh transparently
satisficing of these these questions
what we call estims are scientific
questions. Um this will get elaborated
even in the first example I do and so in
the interest of transparency I want to
show you how elaborate this eventually
gets uh because the core basian workflow
is a teachable thing is where we begin
uh to scaffold you up to realistic data
analysis problems and that's a that's a
general teaching strategy in the course
is that I start with something that's
unrealistically simple that doesn't
actually look like your own thesis work
right because real data analysis is much
more complicated than this. Yeah. But
it's good to start here, I think, with
the core and get that logic and then add
things onto it. So, in that entrance,
let me show you what we're going to add.
All right. But but we're not going to do
it uh in the beginning here. The first
thing we're going to add is checking
basic checks. There there are things
that I call prior model checking. That
is before you've taken your statistical
procedure and given it real data, there
are things you can do to ensure that it
works or that it makes scientific sense.
I call that prior model checking and
I'll teach you some some workflow for
that. And then there's posterior model
checking which are the things you check
for the model after you fit it to the
data. So even if all the prior model
checks pass, the model can still be bad,
right? So you need posterior model
checks and we'll do those as well. Uh
then there's a bunch of stuff we want to
do with estimates. Rarely is a parameter
estimate itself answer to a scientific
question. There are a bunch of things
that we need to do to post-process model
output. Um, and I want to teach you
those things as well. These include
things called marginal effects, which
are predictions. Causal effects are
things called marginal effects. Don't
worry about why it's called marginal
yet. It's not an insult, right? Means an
average in statistics. Marginal means
average in statistics. In normal
English, it it's an insult, right? But
in in statistics, it just means average.
Uh, and in statistics, we like averages.
It's usually what we like. So, it's a
compliment. uh marginal effects are so
if you want to estimate a causal effect
that's an example of a marginal effect.
Um I want to show you specifically and
in different examples how to do that.
There's this thing called
postratification which is incredibly
useful for those of us that work with
population level data is not experiments
but population level data. Often we want
to post stratify the estimates. Um and
then there are these things called
sensitivity analyses to understand uh
how the model functions and how uh give
us more information about how reliable
the results are beyond just the
parameter estimates. Um and then there's
way more we could add to this as well.
This is what I call the real dirty
basian workflow. Um when you do your
actual projects and and this is just the
truth. um you have a bunch of different
uh models, scientific models,
statistical models, data sets,
estimates. Uh people come to me all the
time with they're like halfway through
their thesis and then they decide to
consult the statistitian and they come
to my office and they have like 30
different models and they want help. Uh
and fine, I'm there to help you, but
this is this is the real deal. But we
work up to this and understanding how to
deal with this complexity as we go. Uh
but in my experience, all science on the
cutting edge of any field has this kind
of complexity where you're working with
multiple scientific models and multiple
questions and a bunch of uncertainty
about how to answer it statistically and
different data sets and the data sets
have different flaws and you're trying
to triangulate evidence. So this is the
real goal. Yeah. But it's going to take
us uh 20 weeks to get here. I'm going to
do it in 10 because I'm doing two
sections. But that's the idea is to work
up to this realism, right? to cope with
these issues and all the other things
that come from it. Okay, but forget
that.
Um, let's come back to the core
workflow. And what I hope to do today in
this first lecture is to give you a
cartoon version of this core basian
workflow in a simple sampling exercise
so that you can get become acquainted
with the different components of it. And
then in subsequent weeks, we're going to
take real data sets and work through the
same core workflow every time. uh so
that you understand the procedures. Uh
so the the core basian workflow always
begins on the far left here with some
what I call generative model. This is a
a scientific model that can produce
data. That's what generative means.
Yeah. Uh it's it's a scientific theory
that's been specified at a sufficient
level of detail that you could make
predictions with it. That makes sense.
And you'll get examples. So we'll we'll
go from there. Um and then an est demand
which is just a fancy Latin word for
what you want.
Yeah. And uh the question the scientific
questions you have. Um and estimates can
be descriptive. It can be a question
about just the frequency of something in
a population, right? What what are the
frequency of psychologists in this room?
I would say half.
Yeah, you don't have to raise your
hands, but I would guess half. That's my
prior. Um, you can also have estims as
we often do in the sciences which are
causal estimates, things we want to know
about what causes results. So, I'm going
to move through this this slide from
left to right. Uh, but before I keep
moving, I want to say a little bit about
that about what causal inference means
because in statistics, it means a lot
less than it does in science in general.
And I want to be clear about that
distinction before we before we move on.
um causal inference in statistics and
machine learning uh is narrower uh than
the general uses of the term which is
fine because all all plain English words
have technical meanings which are much
narrower than we use them for in general
the point is just not to be confused
causal inference when we do data
analysis scientific data analysis can
mean multiple things uh but none of them
mean mechanism
that's what I want to emphasize to you
now so for the biologists here there
must the other biologists you think
about like what a causal model is you
think like the Kreb cycle or some
something like that that's really a
triumph of of science we don't mean that
now that's a scientific model but causal
inference is narrower questions about
something like the crep cycle so it's
not about mechanisms and you can do
causal inference very effective causal
inference without knowing mechanisms at
some resolution so I want to I want to
be clear about that and give you some
examples so causal inference typically
means one of three things In in
scientific data analysis, it means some
form of prediction, a specific kind of
prediction that is the consequence of an
intervention in a system. This is the
interventionist definition of causal
inference. And I think very often this
is what people implicitly mean when they
talk about um they measured the effect
of something is that they could tell you
if you intervened in a particular way in
a system what would change. Does that
make sense? Yeah. There's some nodding
heads. I appreciate that always. I like
the feedback. I'm kind of lost to feel
alone up here. Um uh the second there'll
be lots of examples of that
interventionist view in in the course.
Uh the second is what I call the
imputation view of causal inference and
this is the idea that we would be able
to guess what would have happened if
things had been different. Now this is a
very subjunctive sort of statement. I'll
have an example in a in a couple of
slides. And then third is the
explanatory version of causal inference
where we could say not what would have
happened if things had been different or
what will happen if we intervene but why
something happened.
Yeah, this is another use of it. Uh let
me give you some some toy examples of
each. I think this conceptual grounding
is useful before we move forward. So on
the prediction view of causal inference
um I use this simple example of uh trees
and uh when the trees blow in the wind
now you all know um oop sorry that
advanced
when the trees come back.
Okay when the trees blow in the wind you
know the wind is making the trees leaves
move and not the reverse. Right? But
imagine you were foolish and you didn't
know that. Um
uh you could test it by doing
interventions in the system. You could
climb up the tree and shake the branches
and uh will this go backwards now? Yes,
thank you. Um shake the branches and see
how much wind is produced, right? A
little bit but not very much. And the
consequence you could in contrast you
could blow wind on the tree and watch
the leaves move. So that's an experiment
you do by intervening in the system to
figure out causes. You don't really
understand mechanisms there, right? So
what are the mechanisms by which wind
makes leaves move? That's fluid
dynamics. None of us understand that,
right? Maybe maybe there's a physicist
here who does. Apologies if so. Navia
Stokes equations or something are needed
to do this. And that's complicated. But
you can make predictions then about what
would be the consequence of climbing up
the tree and shaking the leaves if you
understand cause. That's causal
inference from the interventionist
perspective. And that's the basics of
the basis of randomized experiments,
right? Why do experiments tell us
causes? Because we've intervened in
known ways in the system. At least we
hope. Yeah. Okay. Um let me get back to
this this next slide. Uh causal
imputation
is um uh distinct from that in the sense
that if we know a cause that means we
could reconstruct counterfactual
outcomes things that that didn't happen
um but could have happened if we
understand the system. Uh so what if
some other nation had gone to the moon
first before the United States? Yeah, if
you understand the causes of geopolitics
and the space race and stuff, then you
could you could imputee what would have
happened instead, right? Uh that's
that's the imputation effect. This is
this is very closely related formally to
the interventionist view because in the
interventionist view you're also
imputing statistically what would have
happened if any individual unit had
gotten the other treatment.
Right? So that's the interventionist
view. It's just a question of whether
you're projecting forward or projecting
back. Yeah. But they're very
mathematically they're very very similar
uh uh operations. They're different from
causal explanation as in causible
explanation we're not focused on the
outcome. We're holding the outcome fixed
and we're asking why it happened. It's
still causal inference because you need
some sort of counterfactual model uh in
there. Um so for example, why did the
last glacial maximum stop when it did?
Right? the last ice age. There's still
parts of Europe you can go way north and
you can find glaciers, right?
And those glaciers used to be here,
right? This is a glacier carved
landscape. So why did the ice retreat?
And there are big scientific questions
about that. Explanation is another thing
we like to do with causal models as
well. So the tools I want to teach you
let you construct all those different
things, but they're different estimates.
there are different kinds of things you
want to say about the system and you
need to process the statistical output
in different ways to achieve them.
Okay, let me keep moving here. So
um I'm going to teach you ways to take a
particular generative model and some
some specific question about it some est
demand and use that to develop a
statistical model that will an address
that particular goal. It's not a
statistical model for all purposes. It's
a statistical model for the purpose
you've stated with the generative model
you've stated. Yeah. Which may sound
narrow, but what I want to convince you
of is that's all we've got.
There is no general model free
inference. Yeah. That's that's just
unfortunately how it is. And more than
that, the sorts of questions that people
do in the literature are in this
framework already. It's just not
transparently done. So we want to give
some logical transparent grounding uh in
a sense to the the framework almost all
scientists are already using uh the
point of the statistical model in this
workflow is to extract information from
the data to answer a particular question
simple no there's a lot of computation
involved here but uh uh you were all
born at a wonderful time can I digress
for a moment and just try to convince
you of that you are lucky to be alive
today I I mean, sure, the oceans are
going to boil off eventually, but long
after you're dead, no, you were born at
a wonderful time in the sciences when
computational power is incredible.
Right? So, uh, when my PhD supervisor
did his dissertation, they worked on
punch cards with computers. So, some of
you have heard these tales. Let me
quickly bore you with what it would have
been like. So, the idea is on a piece of
paper, he would write a computer program
as an algorithm. This would then be
keyed into some kind of terminal that
would print literal cards that had holes
in them that were the computer program.
These cards would be delivered to a
basement on the campus where some very
bored graduate student would receive
them and put them in a cube. These cards
would be fed into a mainframe computer
which would do the tasks in order and
print out the output. You would return
sometimes days later uh to receive your
output and discover there was an error.
then the cycle would begin again. Yes.
And that's what that's what PhD
computational research was like in the
70s. Um I I did my dissertation in the
90s. It was a lot better then. Uh the
internet was young and it seemed like a
good idea,
right? But still to do the sort of
techniques that we're going to use
routinely in this course, things like um
Marco Chain Monte Carlo, we had to write
all of the algorithms ourselves. There
were no generalpurpose math libraries
like there are now that just blackbox
that away from you so you don't have to
worry about it. So most of the
computation as much as possible I'm
going to push into the background so
that you can focus on the scientific
structure of this workflow and piecing
it together. Lots of people have spent
count hundreds and thousands of person
hours writing fantastic math libraries
so that you no longer have to deal with
those details. But I want you to
understand in some sense, some
conceptual sense, what's going on in
that math library and that will teach
you that as well. But you don't have to
write the algorithms luckily anymore.
That's what I mean when I say you are
lucky to be in science now that the
computation is there and we can do
things that even a generation ago in
science were was would have been thought
to be foolhardy like fit models with
thousands of parameters. That's an easy
thing to do now. We do it all the time
and there are really good reasons to do
it. Um anyway, that's my sermon about
why you're lucky to be alive now. Thank
you. Okay. Um we're going to be basian
in this course. And the reason for being
basian is it's practical. Uh basian
inference is a general purpose way to
extract information from data. It's
closely tied to generative models. Um in
simple examples, it feels like overkill,
like carving a birthday cake with a
chainsaw. That's the purpose of this
image, right? And that that can be true.
Uh I mean now everything's blackboxed
away in some math library. So it doesn't
seem like it's it's uh overkill, but
there's a lot more computation that goes
on in fitting a simple basian model than
there is in say doing an ordinary le
squares approximation.
Um and they give you very very sim
similar results for simple uh models.
And that's fine. But with realistic
analyses with big data sets and
measurement problems and missing data
and the need to make um reliable
predictions then the basian framework
makes essential things easier than
non-basian frameworks. It's very easy to
add these complexities like missing data
and measurement error and latent
variables and this magical thing called
regularization which you need in your
life. You really do. I will convince you
of that. Um, all of these things are
easy in bay and they're hard in other
frameworks. They can be done in other
frameworks. So, I'm not trying to say
the other frameworks can't do this and
the other frameworks do do this. It's
just once you've learned the basian
machinery, it seems hard at first. You
pay upfront and then you reap the
dividends later on. Whereas in the other
frameworks, they're really simple in the
beginning and then you encounter
realistic data sets and solving those
problems is much harder. So, this is
like parenting in this class, right?
where I make you pay the costs up front.
You go to school and then you know you
you earn a higher wage or something like
that. Um uh the last line on this slide
it's important to emphasize basian
models are naturally generative. That is
a basian statistical model is itself a
simulation of a data set. You can run it
forward or back. You can you can produce
synthetic data with it or you can feed
data into it and get parameter estimates
out. It works in both directions. And
that's not true of other kinds of
statistical frameworks. Not always.
Yeah. So that that's not an essential
feature of a statistical framework, but
it's a really nice one for connecting to
this workflow where we want to start
with generative models because often the
basian cistical model and the generative
model look very very similar. They have
the same expressions and the same
structure, but they don't have to. Okay,
last thing I want to say about that. I'm
not going to spend any more time in this
course comparing bays to other
frameworks really unless you have
questions for me in which case I'm happy
to give my opinions. I just want to say
that um the other nice thing about being
a scientist now is the stats wars are
really over. Uh uh the boomers uh people
talk about the boomers all the time. Uh
the boomers fought about bays and
frequentism in the 20th century starting
in the early 20th century uh into the
80s very strongly and um those wars are
over. Uh most research stats departments
are heavily basian now. uh the sciences
use bays in routine ways. There are many
kinds of models which are only fit using
basian methods now especially in
biology. It's just a completely
uncontroversial framework now. All those
boomer wars about the epistemological
dangers of being basian. It's just it
all turned out not to be true. Right?
The world has not ended and we make
scientific progress. Um at the same time
uh since basian the basian community
isn't as embattled as it used to be in
the boomer era last century they've
relaxed and chilled out a bit right and
and the philosophical overreach of
certain schools of basianism have ended
as well. Uh this is just a general
method that forms the core of what we do
with probability theory in the sciences.
Essentially all of the recent gains in
artificial intelligence are have been
done within the basian framework. It's a
completely uncontroversial way to do
work. So that's all I want to say about
it. So let them fight. Yeah. Um okay,
back to our workflow. Uh building
statistical models um especially even
moderately complicated ones needs its
own workflow. And this I'm just going to
assert that now. But when we do the
examples in the course, I will build
models up incrementally and that's its
own subworkflow. So even once you've
defined [clears throat] the generative
model and the est demand, you feel very
satisfied and you know the final model
you want to fit uh by logically
combining those two things. Uh you still
want to incrementally build up to it
just so you can reliably engineer it and
reduce the cognitive strain. And so
there are going to be extra steps in
many of the examples I give which are
just about reliably developing that
model so that you know that it's
working. And often that means starting
with a model that's simpler than the one
you need. Yeah. And two good things come
of that. Uh the first is that you get
more reliable engineering of the final
model. Right. If you if you make a model
that has five, six, seven variables in
it and some set of interactions and then
you run it and something doesn't work,
you did a bunch of things at once. So
you don't know what doesn't work. So if
we but if you add one thing at a time,
then you know it works. The other thing
you get from that is comparing the
simpler models to the final model
teaches you things about how the final
model works. Things that you can't get
without that comparison. And that's not
about deciding which model to work. It's
about understanding how the model is
functioning. And so I'll give you
examples of that as we go too. Okay.
All right. Um so the the
more uh entertaining way hopefully to to
talk about these subworkflows is I feel
like it's very often true in stats
courses that uh the way modeling is
taught is it's like this this old meme
about how to draw an owl. And this is an
old meme and I know memes age very
rapidly on the internet. So, but maybe
some of you know this. Um, here's how it
goes. No one knows the origin of this,
by the way. It just appeared on Reddit
at some point, as things do, and and now
we have it. Um, so step one of drawing
an owl is to draw some circles.
Okay. Um, and then step two is you draw
the rest of the owl. Aha. Okay.
Statistical modeling is often like that,
right? What we teach you in in the
introductory stats course is the basics.
Uh, like, well, this is what you do. you
put these things on the right hand side
and this thing on the left. Uh then have
fun. Uh but there's way way more in
between actually in getting the thing to
work and what if something goes wrong
and then how do I interpret the output?
Um getting to draw the owl is
complicated and so there's a bunch of
intermediate steps uh that I want to put
into this. Right? So my mom went to art
school and so I have some family history
in knowing about how many intervening
steps there are in drawing an owl or a
horse. God horses are the worst. just a
messed up animal. What is up with its
legs? If you've ever tried to draw a
horse, right? It's But artists can do
these things because they do
scaffolding. They draw lines that they
later erase or mark over. Uh those
things aren't visible at the end, but
they're essential to the reliable
production of the product they want. And
that's the way I I view scientific
modeling as well. is there are things I
want to teach you which are scaffolds,
ladders that you climb, but you discard
them at the end, but they're still
really important to the process and
that's what I want to teach. Does that
make sense? Um, so that'll add some
fluster to examples, but I think it's
really essential to getting things to
work. Um, so there's this metaphor I I
often use that scientific data analysis
is is a lot like amateur software
engineering, right? It's like software
engineering. It is software engineering
because you're all scripting now. I
think this is nice is that we've moved
beyond point-and-click software, which
is good because it documents what you've
done and it gives you more freedom. Um,
so you're really doing software
engineering, but you have no training in
it. That's a bad situation, right, to be
in. So, I'm going to give you a little
bit of software engineering training.
Not a lot, but a little bit, just the
minimal amount. And uh I I really
believe in general in this occupation
and especially in computational tasks. I
believe in this thing called the 8020
rule which is you get 80% of the benefit
from the first 20% of the education.
Right? And that last 20% of the benefit
is going to take you 80% of the of the
learning time. Uh so you can postpone
that. But I'm going to give you that
that that 80% is the idea. So you won't
know everything about software
engineering and that's not the goal. uh
but maybe you never need it but you need
something. Um and uh there are three
reasons. The first is you really want to
understand what you're doing right not
just play in the script and get some
results. Uh I think another nice thing
about being scientists now is that we've
all heard of the replication crisis and
we know that just playing around with
our data until we get some p values less
than 5% is very dangerous for cumulative
knowledge. Right? So we don't want to do
that. We want to understand what we're
doing and be able to justify the steps.
Um, documenting your work reduces error.
Even if you have a very logical and
precise way to do things and it's the
right way to do it, you everybody makes
mistakes and so documentation helps you
reduce those mistakes. You want a way to
work that um really not only documents
error but reduces its likelihood. And
third is a social thing. You want to be
able to to tell your colleagues that you
have worked in a way which has quality
assurance, right? Uh you've all seen
this meme where somebody walks into
somebody's house and there's trash
everywhere and they go, "You live like
this." Right? So this is what people's
project folders are often like, right?
You don't want to show people your
project folder because they'll be like,
"You live like this?" Right? A bunch of
loose spreadsheets and different copies
of word documents and let's not live
like that anymore. Okay? um work in a
way that you won't be ashamed of because
it is a better way to work that gives
your colleagues greater trust in the
results of your research.
Okay, that's the second sermon of the
lecture and hope maybe the last. All
right, finally uh the last thing we want
to get out of this, we've got our
statistical model. We're going to
combine it with some data to produce an
estimate and there's a bunch of
algorithms involved in doing this. Um,
and those will mainly be uh blackboxed
away into math libraries for you. But I
I want to tell you what they are because
there are trade-offs involved in them.
But we can we can postpone some of that
as we go. And then there's going to be
more of this in almost every example
where we process the estimates to
produce some particular comparison or
prediction or that really satisfies the
scientific question we started with.
Okay. So, I've got 30 more minutes here.
And so, for the next half hour, I want
to give you a basic cartoon example.
This is an artificial example, but it
has all of the core structure of a real
scientific example. And that is to ask
if we wanted to know the proportion of
this inflatable globe. I I people
listening at home don't know that I'm
holding this globe in my hand here. So,
there's a real inflatable globe. So,
let's This is a question about the real
planet Earth, but we don't have the
planet Earth to sample from. So, uh,
we're going to use the inflatable globe.
If I wanted to know what proportion of
this globe is covered in water,
metaphorical water, right? Um, how would
we do it? How could you figure that out?
There are different ways to do it. And I
think the one of the wonders of
statistical science is we can do it in
the dumbest way possible and it actually
works really efficiently. And that is
just by sampling. Just by sampling
random points on the surface. Yeah. And
so that's what we're going to do. And
I'm going to use that to build up a
basic basian statistical model and teach
you what basian inference is and how it
works mechanically. We won't finish this
in this lecture. We'll finish it next
week. Uh but it's going to move slow,
but I really want you to walk away from
this with a core understanding of
exactly what basian inference is and
actually how simple it is. It's an
incredibly simple procedure. Um
so, uh the idea is if I take this and
and I were to throw it into the crowd, I
won't do that. Don't worry. If I was to
throw it into the crowd at you, um, and
you catch it, you could look where your
right index finger is, whether it's on
water or land, and then just shout out
water, and then you throw it at someone
else, and then they catch it, and so on.
Don't worry, I'm not going to do it.
There's no no threat of a globe coming
at you. I promise. But, uh, and we do
that a bunch of times, and we will get
samples. So, let's go to the next slide.
Here I have animated this. Here's my
virtual globe toss. I spent an entire
afternoon making this animation. I'm
very pleased with it. Thank you.
[laughter] And uh there's a bunch of
technical problems it turns out to solve
and getting the path to work right on on
a sphere. So we're we're getting samples
here as it spins around. That's almost
land. It's Florida. It's kind of land
not you know at least half the year. Uh
finally water. So we got a land, a
water, two lands, three waters, a land
and two waters. This is a sample of
nine. Is that nine points? And so if I
gave you this sample just as an example
and I ask you um how should we use this
sample to produce an estimate? Now
remember our our question is what
proportion of the globe is covered in
water?
Um uh so how should we use this sample?
And there are lots of ways to use a
sample to produce an estimate. Probably
you can just take a guess right now how
you would use it. What's if you're going
to make just a single number to
summarize what this sample says about
portion on the globe, you might just say
what proportion of the sample is water,
right? You might think that just
intuitively and many many people have.
The question is how do we justify that?
Right? Are there alternatives? And then
how do we add uncertainty onto that
estimate? Because a smaller sample and a
larger sample should have different
uncertainties. So how do we get that?
and we need a reliable procedure for
doing that. Um, so that's what we're
going to build up to. Uh, what we're
going to eventually get to, there's
going to be a bunch of this will be this
will be next lecture I think by the time
we get to this is a way for any possible
proportion of water. Uh, that's the
horizontal axis on this slide. Those are
all the possible answers to the
question, what proportion of the globe
is covered in water? Every real number
between zero and one is a possible
answer. And for every one of those real
numbers, we want some statistical answer
of how plausible that is. And that's
what we're we're working towards. And
what I'm going to teach you is a way to
do this for each sample one at a time.
The unique information that each
additional data set adds to change this
curve. And this is a procedure called
basian updating. It's it's kind of
famous. Yeah. And it's a really simple
um uh completely derived from the axums
of probability way to answer the
question what information is in this
data set to answer this question. So
every little updating step there we're
going to come back to this animation
next lecture because there's a bunch of
intervening logic that gets us here.
We're going to start with something much
sillier. Okay, but eventually we're
going to get to this and this is a
general algorithm for processing all
kinds of statistical models and
producing uncertainty. Um, okay, back to
the core basian workflow. I'm going to
work through this with the globe in mind
and show you uh in a not too detailed
way, but enough detail to give you the
the cartoon version of this how this
works in this example. So, the first
thing we have to do is nominate some
generative model and an estimated
in water. What's the globe tossing
sampling model? Right? What's the
generative model of the globe? And the
way to think about this is um where does
the data come from? What are the causal
processes that have are producing the
data set? And I've already explained
that to you, but just let me remind you.
Um I think this animates again. Yeah.
What are we assuming when I've defined
this task? I've assumed that each toss
of the globe produces an independent
sample. Right? Now, that may not be true
because I'm just I'm not actually
throwing it at you. But if I were to
throw it at you, there might be
correlation, right? It's hard to say,
but this is the assumption we're making
uh in thinking about the sample. Each
toss is independent. So each subsequent
land and water are not correlated in any
particular way. And on any particular
toss of the globe, the chance that your
finger lands on water is just the
proportion of water.
Does that make sense? That's the
generative model.
I don't
>> What do you mean a chance?
>> So, if I were I'm not going to throw
this at you. Don't I keep saying that
and I just want to make clear. Do not
feel threatened. [laughter] I will never
throw anything at you. Right? So, not
even an inflatable globe. If I were to
throw this and then you catch it, uh the
chance that your right index finger is
on water is the proportion of the globe
covered in water.
Right? That's the assumption that that
goes with the generative model. That
wouldn't be true. It'd be easier to
understand if I give you a
counterfactual model. Suppose that's not
true. Suppose that your finger is drawn
inexorably towards water when you catch
it. Then the chance would be greater.
There would be a bias in the sampling
and we're assuming that's not true.
That's the model.
>> Does that make sense?
>> Okay. Um there are definitely biased
sampling uh procedures in the sciences.
So we need to think about that later in
the course but right now we won't. Okay.
Um this can be written as a program and
this might make you don't always have to
do this. Uh but I think in this case
maybe it helps dispel a bit that there
is a model here that's generative. You
can produce simulated globe tosses. This
is not a statistical model because it
won't produce any inferences. It's just
a forward simulation. And I've uh used
the simplest kind of R code possible.
There's no distributional assumptions.
We're just using the sample function
inside inside this function wrapper so
that we can run it a bunch of times. So
the way this works is we define the
outcome space the possible observations
and those are capital W and capital L
for water and land.
Um we define how many times we're going
to toss the globe and that's capital N.
And then we define the probability of
each of the possible outcomes and I've
I've defined those here as P and one
minus P where P is the proportion of the
globe covered in water. And that's
that's our est demand. We want to learn
P.
Does this make sense? Um so you can run
this in your in your free time. Uh and u
you will get a sample a new sample every
time you run it, right? Of of the globe.
You can run it a bunch of times in fact.
So if we replicate it a bunch of times,
each column here is a separate set of
tosses. Um
uh is that right? Yes. And so so the
first column is the first set of tosses
and then the next and the next and the
next. So there's variation. You don't
always get the same result. We want a
statistical procedure which has
properties which work well for samples
of this type. And the question is how to
do that. And the the lucky answer is we
just rely on probability theory and use
bays. uh but before we get to that it's
just nice to know what the generative
model means. It means the view that we
have a model of how the data are
produced in this case through an
experiment.
Yeah. But uh if you're sampling from
nature uh without interventions then you
also have a generative model. You have a
generative model of how nature has
produced that sample combined with how
you collected the information which may
have produced biases.
um
various points in the course, we're
going to test things uh to be sure that
they work. And I don't want to emphasize
this too much today because we'll have
lots of time in the future to talk about
it. Um but one of the ways to test your
code is to try extreme settings that you
know the answer to, right? And so if the
code doesn't produce the right answer on
at extreme areas, it's not producing the
right answer at less extreme areas
either. So you can do these informal
tests. Um it'd be nice to have some kind
of optimal test, but there is no such
thing in general. Uh so you try
different ways to break uh your software
and see if it's broken. So the first
thing I've done here, for example, is I
set the coverage of the globe to one. I
set P equal to one, which means the
globe is entirely covered in water. Um
and then I get a sample and yes, it's
all water. If that weren't true,
then obviously my code is bad. Yeah. So
that's what I mean by trying an extreme
setting. Uh this is the quick way and
often this uncovers bugs very rapidly in
your code. But some kind of testing is a
good idea. If you don't test it all, you
miss everything, right? And then and
then yes uh maybe someone else will find
your error and you'll be embarrassed,
but probably no one will find your error
and then you will just pollute the
scientific literature and go to science
hell. Yeah, that's a joke. I don't
believe in science hell. Only in science
heaven. Okay. Um uh and then uh the
other test I do here is so-called
asintoic test. If I took a really really
big sample, we're going to throw the
globe one E4 times, right? 10^ the 4th
times. Um and then we're just going to
count up the proportion of the sample
that is water. That should converge to
the proportion of the globe that's
covered in water. And it does. Uh so it
seems like the simulation is working.
Our sample is going to be much smaller
than one than 10^ the 4th. It's going to
be nine.
Yeah, we want a statistical procedure
that works the same way for large
samples and small samples and gives the
right answer in both cases. The right
answer not being the truth but the right
answer is what information is in the
sample. That's what we mean. Okay.
Um now we need to build a statistical
model and our statistical models in this
course will always be basian estimators
basian models for extracting information
from the data. So I want to give you a
sense about what that means in this case
and this is going to take some some time
to build up and I'm going to do it
cartoonishly which I hope delivers
better understanding. Uh so first the
logic of basian inference is incredibly
simple. Often the calculations are
difficult and that's historically been
an issue that is now now largely
addressed. But the the idea is actually
hundreds of years old. Basian inference
is older than frequentist inference.
It's the old continental way of doing
probability theory. And then those the
English decided they needed a new way to
do it. Right? They used they used to
call basian inference the French
calculus. Right?
>> [laughter]
>> And uh um Gaus uh all Germans here know
who Gaus is call Gaus he did he invented
linear regression as a basian procedure
because there were no frequency
statistics in Gaus's lifetime. Right? So
this is an old thing. The calculations
are hard though. But the idea is
incredibly simple and old. It is just
that for each possible explanation of
the sample we're going to count all the
ways the sample could happen. We'll be I
I'll work this through using the globe
in a moment. Um and then those those
explanations
uh with more ways to produce the sample
are more plausible and then we we
compare them based upon those
plausibilities. Um and it turns out that
this is uh the optimal way to process to
extract information from the data. Um
it's just sometimes quite hard uh in the
context of the globe tossing
example for each possible proportion of
water on the globe. Those are the
explanations, right? The this is also
our estimate in this case for each
possible proportion of water on the
globe. Count all the ways the sample of
tosses could happen and then those
proportions with more ways to produce
the sample are more plausible.
Uh so the way I want to present this to
you so you can understand what counting
means is to think about this metaphor
with a a famous book I hope you've all
read. Uh but instead of of um forking
past into the future of your life, we're
going to have a garden of forking data.
Yeah. So the the sample you've gotten
could have turned out differently.
Of all of the samples you you you could
have gotten, how often is the one that
you got going to happen? Sorry, English
has doesn't have enough grammar to
express counterfactuals like this. So
there there will be cartoons as we go.
need a language with some grammar here.
But uh here's the idea. I want you to
think about a four-sided globe. This is
what it would look like. All right. So,
this this globes are inconvenient
because they have infinite sides. Yeah.
This doesn't quite because it's
inflatable and you can probably see it
has like eight or something actual sewn
together, but a real globe is is smooth.
Um and so counting starts to sound
farcical. So, I want us to forget about
the actual globe for a moment. Just
think about a four-sided globe. Um,
those of you who play Dungeons and
Dragons know what a four-sided die looks
like, right? It looks like this. People,
anybody know what these look like? Yes.
Um, so, uh, this is a four-sided globe.
All right. So, now we're going to
imagine the the four-sided globe is
covered 25% by water, which means
exactly one of its sides is covered in
water.
Good. This is the peak of my drawing
skills, right? Okay.
Um, now what we could imagine is our uh
what I'm going to build up for you is
what I call the garden of forking data.
All the possible samples um that we can
get for different
uh different globes with different
covers coverages of water. And so what
are the different D4 globes that we have
here? Uh the first option would be no
water at all. That is the proportion of
water is zero. All four sides are land.
White means land here and blue means
water. Um the second possibility is that
one of the four sides is water. So
that's 25% of the globe is covered in
water or half or three4s or all of it.
These are all the possible globes. So
these are all the explanations we need
to work through. And so for each of
these, what we're going to do is count
all the ways the sample could happen.
Which sample? I'm going to start with
just three tosses. Waterland water, but
we'll expand that to the full sample
that I showed you before. Okay, that's
our project and we've got 10 minutes, so
I think I can I can get a little way
into it. Um, let's start with uh just
the one out of four, the 25% coverage
example. We're imagining that were the
truth. We don't know that's the truth.
We're trying to figure out what the
truth is. I know this seems backwards,
but this is just how it works. Imagine
that that were the truth. condition on
that being the truth and then ask um how
many ways are there to observe the
sample water land water if the truth
were that one out of four sides is
covered in water. So this is where the
garden of forking data uh comes in. Um
first there's the first possibility that
is the first toss of the globe. Uh one
out of four times if it's a fair die
we're assuming it's a fair die. One out
of four times you will see water. Um but
other things could happen as well. You
could have seen land. Uh on the second
possibility the each of those path
branches again. This is the garden of
forking data. So once you've tossed the
globe again whatever happened the first
time anything could happen the second
time as well. So now there are a bunch
of possible uh different samples that
arise. Uh, you're probably thinking, um,
but all of those white things are the
same. No, they're not. They're different
sides,
right? We're lumping them together as
land because we're not paying attention
to the coordinate, but it's a different
sample because a different sequence of
events has happened, right? So, it's
easier to think about if you think about
the globe. There are a bunch of points
that you're just coding as water, but
they're different places, right? You
could take that same sample if you
recorded the latitude and longitude and
do and ask different questions with it.
Yeah, does that make sense? They're
different samples. So, the different
white dots are actually different data.
It's just that we're not going to care
about those differences. We're going to
categorize them the same. Uh, and then
on a third toss, everything branches
again. And now we have a big wonderful
garden, right, of possible of possible.
So, with three tosses of the globe,
you've got um uh four uh uh four time
four times four possible data sets.
Yeah. So lots of possible samples that
can arise. Yeah. But we've seen one and
the question is how many ways are there
to see that data set that is how many
waterland waters are there in this
garden? So let's take the first
observation
um and just trace it out, right? See if
my my animation works. Yes, this also
took me an afternoon. So thank you. Um
so we've get we've gone down that path
in our garden. Now we could have gone
four different ways but we've just gone
this way right this is the the garden of
forking data. Um on the second
observation we observe
uh a land and there are three paths that
would have given us that. So now there
are three ways to get the first two
samples we've observed.
You feeling the garden now?
Um and then finally on our third data
point we get a water again and there are
three ways to do that as well because
for each of the other uh three paths
there's one path we could go down which
would give us that. So there are three
total ways to obsing
our four-sided globe is 25% water. There
are three ways to observe the sample.
And now you're thinking, okay, but so
what? We're going to compare this to the
counts we get from the other possible
globes. And then we're going to compare
them. And this is basian updating. It
really is this dumb. Yeah. But it's also
genius. Now I want to point out that
there's nothing about this procedure,
this logic which is chosen. Uh what you
choose are the axioms of probability.
Well, you didn't choose them. Um some
mad Russian did, right? But um Kabulov
but uh but those axioms nobody debates
them. They're just true things about the
definition of probability spaces. Once
you agree to those this logic is
necessary. It's the only procedure
that's consistent with them. Yeah. Um
there are some hardcore frequentists
which disagree with what I said, but
they're wrong. No. Okay. We won't have
that debate today. Um uh okay. So three
ways to see this sample for 25% water.
So, let's make a table. Uh, go back to
this table before for the one out of
four four-sided globe. Three ways to
produce the sample. What about the other
possibilities? Two of these we get for
free. I could draw the garden, but I'm
not going to. The first and the last,
there are zero ways. Why? Because with
the first, you'll never see water, and
we've seen water. And with the last,
you'll never see land. And we've seen
land. So, there are zero ways to get the
sample from those procedures. Yeah, it's
not always this easy, but sometimes it
is. But you could draw the garden and
count, right? The same procedure works.
Uh what about the others? Let's take the
third one, which is 50% water. Um and
draw the garden for that. Uh so this is
this is the same kind of garden as
before, but notice now that there's 50%
water, and we're going to start at the
bottom and trace out those paths. We get
a water, a land, and a water. How many
ways are there to get the sample for
this globe? Eight. Thank you. Audience
participation greatly appreciated.
Someone said eight. Yes, there are eight
ways to do it. Are you feeling it now?
Yeah, we've got one more possibility. U
make your bets um for
uh three fours covered in water. Again,
we draw the garden, but now with um
three water at each branching point all
the way out and then we trace out the
sample uh three ways. three ways and
nine ways
to get the sample for this possibility.
And then we can fill in the table. Um
for 25% we've got three ways, for 50%
eight ways, and for 75% nine ways. And
those are just counts. And what I've
asserted is that the relative value of
these counts is an indication of the
relative plausibility of each
explanation of the data. Um, and those
relative plausibilities
in in the basian framework, they're not
an estimate in and of itself. There's no
point estimate here. It's just this is
the estimate. It's the comparison of
these counts. And it's something we call
a posterior distribution. We can
represent that more formally in the next
lecture. uh uh what I want to emphasize
now is something different about this
which is that um uh
these plausibilities
um have a lot of really nice properties
about them uh even though they're
they're a logical consequence of
accepting the actions of probability but
they have lots of really nice uh uh
properties which is a benign thing about
the universe usually I think the
universe is hostile to human life it's a
miracle we're alive at all uh so it's
really nice when the mathematical
framework provides ides accidental
benefits. It's just sort of like, wow,
isn't that great? Usually, it's bad,
right? Things turn out being bad, but in
this case, they're really nice
properties of these of these counts and
their relative counts. Um uh we
interpret them as plausibility and their
relative differences and and I'll show
you ways to work with that as we go. One
of the key benefits um is it's very easy
to update them as we get new data. Uh we
can just take the previous counts. we
don't have to count everything again. We
can just multiply by the the number of
ways to get the new data point that
we've arrived at. And this is often
called basian updating. Um uh an
essential insight might be before I
explain it in in more detail is that
there's nothing about those three
initial samples which happen
simultaneously. You could process them
one at a time as three separate
experiments. You could do them on
different days and analyze them with the
same logic. uh just updating as you go.
Prior data are the prior estimate that
that later data update. Uh and that's
the way we do it. So uh I'll be much
more specific about what priors and
prior and post inference is in later
lectures, but for now I want you to see
it as this is a necessary consequence of
the fact that you don't have to process
all the data at the same time, but it
all gives you information about the same
thing you want to know. And so you can
use it all in the same stat model even
if it arrives at different points in
time. Does that make sense? That's the
idea. So in this case in this example um
uh we have our our ways to produce uh in
the second column there that we've
already calculated. This is from the
garden of working data. And then say we
toss the globe one more time and we get
a water. And then we could say again
just for this new sample how many ways
are there to observe it? and they are
zero, one, two, three, four, right?
Which are just the counts of the number
of sides on the die that are watered.
Yeah. And now to get the new ways to
produce the total sample, we just
multiply the previous counts by the new
count.
Um, you could draw the garden. It'd be
really big now. And as the sample gets
bigger, the garden gets really big
because of how combinotaurics works. So
you don't do that. Yeah. But the
multiplication is the logical reduction
of that process of counting. And so now
we get 0 316 27. The differences are
getting bigger, right? And the numbers
are getting bigger as well for the whole
sample. Let's take the sample that I
animated uh many many slides ago now. Um
water, land, water, water, water, land,
water, land water. Uh and actually I
don't think that's the same as the one
before, but it's a sample, right? And um
and let's ask what are the number of
ways each of the possible globes could
produce that? Well, it's still zero for
the first one because um uh logically
the way to do this calculation is you
take the number of of um
uh waters and uh you you take the number
of sides that are water and you
exponentiate that by the number of times
you saw water because that's you're just
multiplying the number of times you saw
water. Um, and then you take the number
of sides that are land and you
exponentiate that by the number of times
you saw land, which in this case is 0 to
the 6 times 4 to the 3 and there's a
zero in there. So, it's all zero, right?
Which is just some math tell you what
you already knew. If there was no water
and you saw water, this is eliminated.
It's logically incompatible with data.
You don't need bays for that. You just
need to pay attention. What you need
bays for are the intermediate cases. Uh,
so when there's one water, now again,
the calculation is going to be
um is going to be uh 1 6 * 3 which is 27
27 ways to see uh the sample.
Um there are 512 ways uh to see if if
the globe is 50% water to see this
sample. That's a bigger difference yet.
Notice the numbers just keep getting
bigger the bigger your sample gets. um
seven uh 729 ways to see the see the
sample if it's threequarters water. Uh
and again zero ways if it's all water.
This is basin updating. That's it. Yeah.
All that glamorous stuff. All those
science papers that have basin in the
title. This is what's going on. Now it's
compressed into a much more efficient
way than doing the counting because
these numbers get big really fast. Um
there's a formula uh for producing these
things. It's just that the ways for P to
produce um the sample of of counts of
water in land is uh 4 P to the W. Why
four? Because there's four sides and P
is the proportion that are covered in in
water. So 4 P becomes one when it's 25%
land, right? It's just a way to make a
formula out of it. Um and 4 minus 4 P to
the L. And this gives you the number of
ways to observe any particular sample W
and L.
These numbers get big real fast and I'm
going to stop on this slide because I'm
out of time. But what we're going to do
when we start next time is I'm going to
actually finally define probability.
Probabilities aren't giant counts.
They're numbers between zero and one.
But we get them by taking these counts
and just forcing them to be between zero
and one. And that's all probability is.
Yes, that's it. the basis of so much
science and that's exactly what it is by
construction. So for example for um 20
water and 10 land there are what is that
a billion? Is that a billion? Someone
tell me. Yes. Uh that's a billion ways
um uh to observe it. We don't want to do
that counting and we don't want to write
numbers like that down. We'd rather have
some number between zero and one. And
that's what we're going to do. So I'm
going to stop there and I promise you
when you return next week uh next
Tuesday I'll pick up exactly here and
we'll go from here into doing basian
updating and moving away from four sides
to all the sides on the globe which is
the infinity of them. Um I want to hang
on get to this slide uh just to remind
you uh the GitHub link at the top please
visit it and give me uh your email if
you want to be on the mailing list. If
you don't want to be in the mailing
list, that's cool, too. You can just
hang out. Okay. Uh, thank you for your
attention and I'll see you next week.
Oh, I'll put the homework up uh later
today on on the GitHub site. Thank you.